Release: M10(February 16, 2005)
-------------------------
Major changes since M9:

  Installers added for Windows, Linux and Mac platforms.

  Aviatrix3D now the default renderer. 2X speed increase.

  X3D spec conformance now much more strict. Enforces the profile and
  component statements, spec version mixing, DEF/USE semantics, scripting
  language changes and more. If your old files don't run anymore, this is
  most likely the cause. Check the console for the error message of what
  you've done wrong.

  Immersive profile node support complete. Some fields and behaviour
  are still incomplete.

  Switched to JInput for input device handling. Allows the use of
  various alternate input devices like gamepads, joysicks etc. Mac version
  disabled for this release due to bugs in JInput.

  Spatialised audio added for Aviatrix3D renderer

  CADInterchange profile and related components added

  Initial GeoSpatial component added

  Initial DIS component added

  H-Anim component implementation.  Software and hardware shader versions.
  Hardware shaders disabled by default due to high hardware requirements
  (Only runs on nVidia 6800 GTO cards).

  New Text implementation using geometry instead of textures for Aviatrix3D

  Multiwall and stereo support added. Elumens Dome support now standard

  Viewpoint lists now populated from inlines

  creaseAngle handing much faster (10x) for dynamic IndexedFaceSets

  Rigid Body Physics extension component added

  Particle Systems extension component updated

  Clipping Planes extension component added

  Picking Utilities extension component added

  Abstract Device I/O extension component added (replaces the old Midi
  component with a much more generic representation for all input device
  types)

  Mostly untested version of vrml.eai.BrowserFactory.createComponent(host,port)
  added.
  
  Added some support for configuration of the EAI and SAI browser components
  using property files and parameters to create*Component.

See the following page for which nodes are implmented:

http://www.xj3d.org/status.html

And this page contains documentation of all the extension components added
to Xj3D.

http://www.xj3d.org/extensions/
